Over the past two years, our understanding of anti-hyperglycemic medications used to treat patients with type 2 diabetes (T2D) has fundamentally changed. Before the EMPA-REG OUTCOME trial, agents used to lower blood glucose were felt to prevent or delay the development of microvascular complications, but were not known to definitively reduce cardiovascular risk or mortality. Previous studies with then novel sodium-glucose cotransport-2 (SGLT2) inhibitors demonstrated improvements in several cardiovascular and renal risk factors, including HbA1c, blood pressure, weight, renal hyperfiltration, and albuminuria. However, as with other antihyperglycemic drugs, it could not be known if these salutary effects would translate into improved cardiorenal outcomes. In the EMPA-REG OUTCOME trial, SGLT2 inhibition with empagliflozin reduced the primary outcome of major adverse cardiovascular events (MACE), while also reducing mortality, hospitalization for heart failure, and progression of diabetic kidney disease. In the CANVAS Program trials using canagliflozin, the rates of the 3-point MACE endpoint, the risk of heart failure and the renal composite endpoint were also reduced, albeit with an increased risk of lower extremity amputation and fracture. As a result, clinical practice guidelines recommend the consideration of SGLT2 inhibition in high-risk patient subgroups for cardiovascular risk reduction. Ongoing primary renal endpoint trials will inform the cardio-metabolic-renal community about how to optimally treat patients with chronic kidney disease - including those with and without diabetes. Our aim is to review the rationale for renal protection with SGLT2 inhibitors, and their current place in the clinical management of patients with kidney disease.
Compared to enalapril, use of angiotensin-receptor blocker and neprilysin inhibitor sacubitril/valsartan to treat patients with heart failure and reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF) is associated with substantial reductions in both cardiovascular mortality and heart failure progression. The purpose of this review is to discuss the real-world experience of sacubitril/valsartan.    In the years following the publication of the landmark PARADIGM-HF trial in 2014 and its subsequent FDA approval, a growing evidence base supports the safety and efficacy of sacubitril/valsartan in a broad spectrum of patients with HFrEF. Updated clinical practice guidelines have embraced the use of sacubitril/valsartan in preference to ACE inhibitors or ARBs in selected patients. In this review, we highlight the clinical trials that led to these key updates to clinical guidelines, offer practical strategies for patient selection and utilization in clinical practice, and identify important areas of uncertainty that require future research.
The goal of this paper is to provide a summary of the new recommendations in the most recent 2017 ACC/AHA/HFSA Focused Update of the 2013 ACCF/AHA Guideline for the Management of Heart Failure: A Report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines and the Heart Failure Society of America. The intent is to provide the background and the supporting evidence for the recommendations and to provide practical guidance for management strategies in treatment of heart failure patients.    In the 2017 ACC/AHA/HFSA Focused Update of HF guidelines, important additions include new information on biomarkers, specifically on the topics of the diagnostic, prognostic role of natriuretic peptides in heart failure, and the role of natriuretic peptides in screening in patients high risk for HF and prevention of HF. There are important recommendations for treatment of patients with HF with reduced EF (HFrEF), including the beneficial role of angiotensin receptor blocker and neprilysin inhibition (ARNI) treatment in reducing outcomes including mortality, ivabradine in reducing heart failure hospitalizations in stable HFrEF patients with sinus rhythm and heart rate\u2009\u2265\u200970 bpm despite \u03b2-blockers. In patients with HF with preserved EF (HFpEF), though there are no studies demonstrating survival benefit, potential benefit with aldosterone antagonism in reducing HF hospitalizations is noted. In treatment of comorbidities, optimization of blood pressure control to less than 130 mmHg is recommended in hypertensive patients to prevent HF or in patients with hypertension and HFrEF or HFpEF. In addition to recognition on the potential role of treatment of iron deficiency anemia to improve symptoms and functional capacity, caution against use of adaptive servo-ventilation in patients with HFrEF and central sleep apnea and against use of erythropoietin stimulating agents in patients with HFrEF is provided. There are new treatment strategies that are associated with significant improvements in mortality and other outcomes in patients with HF. Successful management of HF requires recognition of indications, contraindications, benefits, safety, and risk of these new therapies. In addition to incorporation of these new treatment strategies, it is critical to focus also on patient education, care coordination, identification of goals of care, monitoring, management of comorbidities, and individualization of therapies. New treatment modalities increase the choices for treatment and provide the opportunity to implement individualized treatment strategies for our patients.
The diverse causes of right-sided heart failure (RHF) include, among others, primary cardiomyopathies with right ventricular (RV) involvement, RV ischemia and infarction, volume loading caused by cardiac lesions associated with congenital heart disease and valvular pathologies, and pressure loading resulting from pulmonic stenosis or pulmonary hypertension from a variety of causes, including left-sided heart disease. Progressive RV dysfunction in these disease states is associated with increased morbidity and mortality. The purpose of this scientific statement is to provide guidance on the assessment and management of RHF.    The writing group used systematic literature reviews, published translational and clinical studies, clinical practice guidelines, and expert opinion/statements to summarize existing evidence and to identify areas of inadequacy requiring future research. The panel reviewed the most relevant adult medical literature excluding routine laboratory tests using MEDLINE, EMBASE, and Web of Science through September 2017. The document is organized and classified according to the American Heart Association to provide specific suggestions, considerations, or reference to contemporary clinical practice recommendations.    Chronic RHF is associated with decreased exercise tolerance, poor functional capacity, decreased cardiac output and progressive end-organ damage (caused by a combination of end-organ venous congestion and underperfusion), and cachexia resulting from poor absorption of nutrients, as well as a systemic proinflammatory state. It is the principal cause of death in patients with pulmonary arterial hypertension. Similarly, acute RHF is associated with hemodynamic instability and is the primary cause of death in patients presenting with massive pulmonary embolism, RV myocardial infarction, and postcardiotomy shock associated with cardiac surgery. Functional assessment of the right side of the heart can be hindered by its complex geometry. Multiple hemodynamic and biochemical markers are associated with worsening RHF and can serve to guide clinical assessment and therapeutic decision making. Pharmacological and mechanical interventions targeting isolated acute and chronic RHF have not been well investigated. Specific therapies promoting stabilization and recovery of RV function are lacking.    RHF is a complex syndrome including diverse causes, pathways, and pathological processes. In this scientific statement, we review the causes and epidemiology of RV dysfunction and the pathophysiology of acute and chronic RHF and provide guidance for the management of the associated conditions leading to and caused by RHF.
Exercise rehabilitation in heart failure patients has been shown to improve quality of life (QoL) and survival. It is also recommended in clinical practice guidelines for ventricular assist device (VAD) recipients. However, there have only been two meta-analyses on the effects of exercise rehabilitation in VAD patients, on only two outcomes. The objective of the review was to quantitatively evaluate the effect of exercise rehabilitation in VAD recipients on functional capacity, exercise physiology parameters, chronotropic responses, inflammatory biomarkers and neurohormones, heart structure and function, and clinical outcomes. The following databases were systematically searched: CCTR, CDSR, CINAHL, EMBASE, PsycInfo, and Medline through to November 2015, for studies reporting on VAD recipients receiving \u2265\u20092 sessions of aerobic training. Citations were considered for inclusion, and data were extracted in included studies as well as quality assessed, each by two investigators independently. Random-effects meta-analyses were performed where possible. The meta-analysis showed that compared to usual care, exercise rehabilitation significantly improved peak VO
Differential diagnosis of lower limb oedema is a common exercise in clinical practice. Taking the example of a patient presenting with such clinical picture in the presence of type 2 diabetes and arterial hypertension with coronary heart disease and chronic kidney disease as comorbidities, we discuss here the respective contributions of congestive heart failure, renal impairment (and possibly nephrotic syndrome) and liver disease in the development of lower limb oedema. The focus is made on a careful patient history and a meticulous clinical examination, two crucial steps that should allow prescribing well selected simple complementary procedures and rapidly make the final diagnosis.
The study sought to characterize patient- and hospital-level variation in early angiography use among non-ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (NSTEMI) patients.    Contemporary implementation of guideline recommendations for early angiography use in NSTEMI patients in the United States have not been described.    The study analyzed NSTEMI patients included in ACTION (Acute Coronary Treatment and Intervention Outcomes Network) registry (2012 to 2014) who underwent in-hospital angiography. Timing of angiography was categorized as early (\u226424 h) vs. delayed (>24 h). The study evaluated factors associated with early angiography, hospital-level variation in early angiography use, and the relationship with quality-of-care measures.    A total of 79,760 of 138,688 (57.5%) patients underwent early angiography. Factors most strongly associated with delayed angiography included weekend or holiday presentation, lower initial troponin ratio values, higher initial creatinine values, heart failure on presentation, and older age. Median hospital-level use of early angiography was 58.5% with wide variation across hospitals (21.7% to 100.0%). Patient characteristics did not differ substantially across hospitals grouped by tertiles of early angiography use (low, middle, and high). Hospitals in the highest tertile tended to more commonly use guideline-recommended medications and had higher defect-free care quality scores.    In contemporary U.S. practice, high-risk clinical characteristics were associated with lower use of early angiography in NSTEMI patients; hospital-level use of early angiography varied widely despite few differences in case mix. Hospitals that most commonly utilized early angiography also had higher quality-of-care metrics, highlighting the need for improved NSTEMI guideline adherence.
Two classes of antidiabetic agents have shown a cardiovascular and renal protection in patients with type 2 diabetes and high cardiovascular risk. Empagliflozin, a sodium-glucose cotransporter type 2 (SGLT2) inhibitor, and liraglutide, a glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) receptor agonist, were granted a reduction of major cardiovascular events and mortality after the positive results of EMPA-REG OUTCOME and LEADER outcome trials, respectively. Protection mechanisms most probably differ between the two pharmacological classes and are perhaps complementary. The question that may arise in clinical practice is to know which drug should be selected between these two options in a patient with type 2 and established cardiovascular disease, before considering a potential combination. The aim of this article is to discuss about the best therapeutic choice according to the patient individual profile and the specificities of each molecule.
The Association of American Medical Colleges' (AAMC) initiative for Core Entrustable Professional Activities for Entering Residency includes as an element of Entrustable Professional Activity 13 to "identify system failures and contribute to a culture of safety and improvement." We set out to determine the feasibility of using medical students' action learning projects (ALPs) to expedite implementation of evidence-based pathways for three common patient diagnoses in the emergency department (ED) setting (Atrial fibrillation, congestive heart failure, and pulmonary embolism).    These prospective quality improvement (QI) initiatives were performed over six months in three Northeastern PA hospitals. Emergency physician mentors were recruited to facilitate a QI experience for third-year medical students for each project. Six students were assigned to each mentor and given class time and network infrastructure support (information technology, consultant experts in lean management) to work on their projects. Students had access to background network data that revealed potential for improvement in disposition (home) for patients.    Under the leadership of their mentors, students accomplished standard QI processes such as performing the background literature search and assessing key stakeholders' positions that were involved in the respective patient's care. Students effectively developed flow diagrams, computer aids for clinicians and educational programs, and participated in recruiting champions for the new practice standard. They met with other departmental clinicians to determine barriers to implementation and used this feedback to help set specific parameters to make clinicians more comfortable with the changes in practice that were recommended. All three clinical practice guidelines were initiated at consummation of the students' projects. After implementation, 86% (38/44) of queried ED providers felt comfortable with medical students being a part of future ED QI initiatives, and 84% (26/31) of the providers who recalled communicating with students on these projects felt they were effective.    Using this novel technique of aligning small groups of medical students with seasoned mentors, it is feasible for medical students to learn important aspects of QI implementation and allows for their engagement to more efficiently move evidence-based medicine from the literature to the bedside.
Sacubitril/valsartan (LCZ696) is a first-in-class, novel-acting, angiotensin receptor neprilysin inhibitor (ARNI) that provides inhibition of neprilysin and the angiotensin (AT    A recent mechanistic study PARAMETER demonstrated that sacubitril/valsartan (LCZ696) is superior to angiotensin receptor blocker (ARB) monotherapy for reducing central aortic systolic pressure (primary endpoint) as well as for central aortic pulse pressure (secondary endpoint) and nocturnal BP preferentially. Considering these results, sacubitril/valsartan may be an attractive therapeutic agent to treat the elderly with age-related hypertension phenotypes, such as drug-uncontrolled (resistant) hypertension characterized as systolic (central) hypertension (structural hypertension) and/or nocturnal hypertension (salt-sensitive hypertension). These are the high-risk hypertension phenotypes which are prone to develop heart failure with preserved EF and chronic kidney disease. Sacubitril/valsartan may be effective to suppress the age-related continuum from hypertension to heart failure, and it could be clinically useful not only for secondary prevention, but also as primary prevention of heart failure in uncontrolled elderly hypertensive patients.
The ACC/AHA/HRS (American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines and the Heart Rhythm Society) guidelines recommend implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) therapy primary prevention in all patients with severely reduced left ventricular ejection fraction (\u226430%) regardless of New York Heart Association (NYHA) functional class, whereas recent European guidelines limit the indication to those with symptomatic heart failure (NYHA\u2009\u2265\u2009II). We therefore aimed to evaluate the long-term survival benefit of primary ICD therapy among postmyocardial infarction patients with and without heart failure (HF) symptoms who were enrolled in MADIT-II (Multicenter Automatic Defibrillator Implantation Trial II). We classified 1,164 MADIT-II patient groups according to the baseline NYHA class (NYHA I [n\u2009=\u2009442], NYHA II [n\u2009=\u2009425], and NYHA III [n\u2009=\u2009297]); patients with NYHA IV were excluded. Multivariate Cox proportional hazards regression modeling was performed to compare the mortality reduction with ICD versus non-ICD therapy during 8 years of follow-up between the 3 NYHA groups. The median (interquartile range) follow-up time was 7.6 (3.5 to 9) years. At 8 years of follow-up, the cumulative probability of mortality in the non-ICD treatment arm was 57% for NYHA I, 57% for NYHA II, and 76% for NYHA III (p\u2009<0.001). Multivariate models demonstrated similar long-term mortality risk reduction with ICD compared with the non-ICD treatment arm regardless of HF symptoms: NYHA I (HR\u2009=\u20090.63, 0.46 to 0.85, p\u2009=\u20090.003), NYHA II (HR\u2009=\u20090.68, 0.50 to 0.93, p\u2009=\u20090.017), and NYHA III (HR\u2009=\u20090.68, 0.50 to 0.94, p\u2009=\u20090.018); p for NYHA class by treatment arm interaction >0.10. In conclusion, primary ICD therapy provides consistent long-term survival benefit among patients with previous myocardial infarction and severe left ventricular dysfunction, regardless of HF symptoms.
We aimed to assess the effectiveness of recommended drug prescriptions at hospital discharge on 1-year mortality in patients with heart failure (HF) and reduced ejection fraction (HFREF).    We used data from the EPICAL2 cohort study. HF patients \u226518years old with left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) <40% and alive at discharge were included and followed up for mortality. Socio-demographic, clinical and therapeutic data were collected at admission. Therapeutic data were collected at discharge and at 6month. Prescription of an angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor (or an angiotensin II receptor blocker [ARB] in case of ACE inhibitor intolerance) and a \u03b2-blocker at discharge were considered "guideline-consistent discharge prescription" (GCDP). A frailty Cox model after propensity score (PS) matching was used to assess the association of GCDP with survival.    Among 624 patients included, the mean (SD) age was 73.6 (12.8) years; 65% were male. A total of 412 (65.6%) patients received GCDP, and 82.8% still had guideline consistent prescription at 6months. A total of 166 patients died during the follow-up, 78 in the GCDP group and 88 in the other group. Before PS matching, patients with GCDP were younger (|StDiff|=48.32%) and had higher body mass index (BMI) (|StDiff|=11.71%), lower LVEF (|StDiff|=23.13%) and lower Charlson index (|StDiff|=55.27%) than patients without GCDP. After PS matching, all characteristics were balanced between the two treatment groups, and GCDP was associated with reduced mortality (pooled HR=0.51, 95% CI [0.35-0.73]).    Prescription of ACE (or ARB) inhibitors and \u03b2-blockers for patients with HFREF may be low despite the evidence for morbidity and mortality improvement with these medications but remains associated with reduced 1-year mortality in unselected HFREF patients.
Clinical practice guidelines currently endorse a reliance on clinical symptoms of overt left ventricular (LV) failure to time aortic valve replacement for severe aortic stenosis; however, delayed aortic valve replacement can result in irreversible LV injury and adverse outcomes. Blood metabolomic signatures possess prognostic value in heart failure; this study assesses whether they are informative in aortic stenosis.    To evaluate the value of metabolomic signatures in reflecting the extent of maladaptive LV remodeling in patients with end-stage aortic stenosis undergoing transcatheter aortic valve replacement, and to assess whether this procedure reverses metabolomic aberrations.    This study of 44 patients with symptomatic severe aortic stenosis who underwent transfemoral transcatheter aortic valve replacement at a single-center tertiary care hospital. Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry-based metabolomic profiling was performed on blood samples collected before and 24 hours after the procedure, and analyses were conducted to identify metabolites related to the measures of LV remodeling.    We evaluated LV ejection fraction, LV mass index, and relative wall thickness, as well as levels of the acylcarnitines C16, C18:1, C18:2, C18, C26, choline, and kynurenine.    We enrolled 44 patients with severe aortic stenosis with a mean (SD) age of 81.9 (8.5) years, of whom 23 (52%) were women. The mean (SD) LV ejection fraction was 56.7% (18.2%), mean (SD) LV mass index was 117.3 (41.4) g/m2, and relative wall thickness was 0.53 (0.14). The mean \u03b2 values of acylcarnitines C16, C18:1, C18:2, C18, and C26 were independently associated with LV mass index (C16: mean, 19.24; 95% CI, 5.48-33.01; P\u2009=\u2009.008; C18:1: mean, 26.18; 95% CI, 14.04-38.32; P\u2009<\u20091.0\u2009\xd7\u200910-4; C18:2: mean, 17.42; 95% CI, 3.40-31.43; P\u2009=\u2009.02; C18: mean, 25.25; 95% CI, 10.91-39.58; P\u2009=\u2009.001; C26: mean, 19.93; 95% CI, 4.41-35.45; P\u2009=\u2009.01), even after adjustments for age, sex, diabetes status, renal function, and B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP). Circulating levels of C18:2 acylcarnitine were associated with LV ejection fraction before and after multivariable adjustment (mean, -6.11; 95% CI, -10.88 to 1.34; P\u2009=\u2009.01). Blood metabolite levels did not independently relate to relative wall thickness. Within 24 hours of transcatheter aortic valve replacement, circulating levels of C16 decreased by 30.2% (P\u2009=\u20097.3\u2009\xd7\u200910-6), C18:1 by 42.7% (P\u2009=\u20093.7\u2009\xd7\u200910-8), C18:2 by 37.3% (P\u2009=\u20095.1\u2009\xd7\u200910-6), and C18 by 38.3% (P\u2009=\u20093.4\u2009\xd7\u200910-5).    In symptomatic patients with severe aortic stenosis undergoing transcatheter aortic valve replacement, circulating levels of long-chain acylcarnitines were independently associated with measures of maladaptive LV remodeling, and metabolic perturbations lessened after procedure completion. Further efforts are needed to determine the clinical applicability of these novel biomarkers.
Pulmonary hypertension (PH) is a serious complication to left heart disease (LHD), affecting a majority of the patients during the course of the disease. Initially, PH-LHD is caused by passive congestion of the pulmonary vessels due to increased left atrial pressures, a condition that is currently denoted as isolated post-capillary PH (Icp-PH). In the majority of patients the increased atrial pressure is a result of elevated left ventricular filling pressures. Furthermore, chronically elevated filling pressures may yield endothelial damage, resulting in structural and functional alterations in the pre-capillary bed with further elevation in pulmonary pressures as well as elevated vascular resistance, defined as combined precapillary and postcapillary PH (Cpc-PH). With previous definitions of PH-LHD it has been difficult to differentiate between the subgroups, so a new classification was presented in the 2015 PH guidelines. Despite PH-LHD being common and serious, specific therapies are lacking for the pulmonary component. Instead, treatments focus on optimizing the underlying cause of PH-LHD and involve medical as well as surgical therapies. In the present review we presents, based on the new guidelines, current knowledge on pathophysiological and pathobiological mechanisms, epidemiology, investigation and treatment of PH-LHD.
Treatment of heart failure depends on etiology, left ventricular function and severity of symptoms. Appropriate diagnosis and treatment requires close collaboration between health care providers. In heart failure with reduced ejection fraction, pharmacological treatment and device therapies are based on solid scientific evidence. Less data exist on treatment of heart failure with preserved ejection fraction, where management of underlying diseases contributing to the syndrome is the primary goal. Patient education and self-care may reduce the need for hospitalizations and improve quality of life. Physical exercise reduces symptoms and improves exercise tolerance.
Major bleeding is a frequent complication for patients with acute myocardial infarction (AMI) and is associated with significant morbidity and mortality.    To develop a contemporary model for inhospital major bleeding that can both support clinical decision-making and serve as a foundation for assessing hospital quality.    An inhospital major bleeding model was developed using the Acute Coronary Treatment and Intervention Outcomes Network Registry-Get With the Guidelines (ACTION Registry-GWTG) database. Patients hospitalized with AMI between January 1, 2012 and December 31, 2013 across 657 hospitals were used to create a derivation cohort (n=144,800) and a validation cohort (n=96,684). Multivariable hierarchal logistic regression was used to identify significant predictors of major bleeding. A simplified risk score was created to enable prospective risk stratification for clinical care.    The rate of major bleeding in the overall population was 7.53%. There were 8 significant, independent factors associated with major bleeding: presentation after cardiac arrest (OR 2.99 [2.77-3.22]); presentation in cardiogenic shock (OR 2.22 [2.05-2.40]); STEMI (OR 1.72 [1.65-1.80]); presentation in heart failure (OR 1.55 [1.47-1.63]); baseline hemoglobin less than 12 g/dL (1.55 [1.48-1.63]); heart rate (per 10 beat per minute increase) (OR 1.13 [1.12-1.14]); weight (per 10 kilogram decrease) (OR 1.12 [1.11-1.14]); creatinine clearance (per 5-mL decrease) (OR 1.07 [1.07-1.08]). The model discriminated well in the derivation (C-statistic = 0.74) and validation (C-statistic = 0.74) cohorts. In the validation cohort, a risk score for major bleeding corresponded well with observed bleeding: very low risk (2.2%), low risk (5.1%), moderate risk (10.1%), high risk (16.3%), and very high risk (25.2%).    The new ACTION Registry-GWTG inhospital major bleeding risk model and risk score offer a robust, parsimonious, and contemporary risk-adjustment method to support clinical decision-making and enable hospital quality assessment. Strategies to mitigate risk should be developed and tested as a means to lower costs and improve outcomes in an era of alternative payment models.
Clinical practice guidelines facilitate optimal clinical practice. Point of care access, interpretation and application of such guidelines, however, is inconsistent. Informatics-based tools may help clinicians apply guidelines more consistently. We have developed a novel clinical decision support tool that presents guideline-relevant information and actionable items to clinicians at the point of care. We aim to test whether this tool improves the management of hyperlipidaemia, atrial fibrillation and heart failure by primary care clinicians.    Clinician care teams were cluster randomised to receive access to the clinical decision support tool or passive access to institutional guidelines on 16 May 2016. The trial began on 1 June 2016 when access to the tool was granted to the intervention clinicians. The trial will be run for 6\u2009months to ensure a sufficient number of patient encounters to achieve 80% power to detect a twofold increase in the primary outcome at the 0.05 level of significance. The primary outcome measure will be the percentage of guideline-based recommendations acted on by clinicians for hyperlipidaemia, atrial fibrillation and heart failure. We hypothesise care teams with access to the clinical decision support tool will act on recommendations at a higher rate than care teams in the standard of care arm.    The Mayo Clinic Institutional Review Board approved all study procedures. Informed consent was obtained from clinicians. A waiver of informed consent and of Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) authorisation for patients managed by clinicians in the study was granted. In addition to publication, results will be disseminated via meetings and newsletters.    NCT02742545.
The purpose of this study was to describe subjective and objective physical activity (PA) levels of two groups of cardiovascular patients who were either post-coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) surgery or diagnosed with heart failure (HF).    A descriptive comparative design was used for this secondary analysis of data from two prior studies.    A convenience sample of 62 outpatients was used to examine PA objectively (Actiheart accelerometer) and subjectively (PA interview).    Objectively, 33% of CABG patients and no HF patients met PA recommendations of \u2265 150 min/week. Subjectively, 56% of CABG and 38% of HF patients reported meeting PA recommendations.    Few patients in the current study met PA recommendations.    Innovative rehabilitation nursing practice strategies are needed (e.g., use of activity trackers, making PA a vital sign) to assist patients in gaining the knowledge and skills to be more active and adhere to PA recommendations.
Heart failure clinical practice guidelines recommend applying validated clinical predictive models (CPMs) to support decision making. While CPMs are now widely available, the generalizability of heart failure CPMs is largely unknown.    We identified CPMs derived in North America that predict mortality for patients with acute heart failure and validated these models in different world regions to assess performance in a contemporary international clinical trial (N=4133) of patients with acute heart failure treated with guideline-directed medical therapy. We performed independent external validations of 3 CPMs predicting in-hospital mortality, 60-day mortality, and 1-year mortality, respectively. CPM discrimination decreased in all regional validation cohorts. The median change in area under the receiver operating curve was -0.09 (range -0.05 to -0.23). Regional calibration was highly variable (90th percentile of absolute difference between smoothed observed and predicted values range <1% to >50%). Calibration remained poor after global recalibrations; however, region-specific recalibration procedures significantly improved regional performance (recalibrated 90th percentile of absolute difference range <1% to 5% across all regions and all models).    Acute heart failure CPM discrimination and calibration vary substantially across different world regions; region-specific (as opposed to global) recalibration techniques are needed to improve CPM calibration.
To review the literature systematically and perform meta-analyses to address these questions: 1) Is there evidence that self-measured blood pressure (BP) without other augmentation is superior to office-based measurement of BP for achieving better BP control or for preventing adverse clinical outcomes that are related to elevated BP? 2) What is the optimal target for BP lowering during antihypertensive therapy in adults? 3) In adults with hypertension, how do various antihypertensive drug classes differ in their benefits and harms compared with each other as first-line therapy?    Electronic literature searches were performed by Doctor Evidence, a global medical evidence software and services company, across PubMed and EMBASE from 1966 to 2015 using key words and relevant subject headings for randomized controlled trials that met eligibility criteria defined for each question. We performed analyses using traditional frequentist statistical and Bayesian approaches, including random-effects Bayesian network meta-analyses.    Our results suggest that: 1) There is a modest but significant improvement in systolic BP in randomized controlled trials of self-measured BP versus usual care at 6 but not 12 months, and for selected patients and their providers self-measured BP may be a helpful adjunct to routine office care. 2) systolic BP lowering to a target of <130 mm Hg may reduce the risk of several important outcomes including risk of myocardial infarction, stroke, heart failure, and major cardiovascular events. No class of medications (i.e., angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, angiotensin-receptor blockers, calcium channel blockers, or beta blockers) was significantly better than thiazides and thiazide-like diuretics as a first-line therapy for any outcome.
To review the literature systematically and perform meta-analyses to address these questions: 1) Is there evidence that self-measured blood pressure (BP) without other augmentation is superior to office-based measurement of BP for achieving better BP control or for preventing adverse clinical outcomes that are related to elevated BP? 2) What is the optimal target for BP lowering during antihypertensive therapy in adults? 3) In adults with hypertension, how do various antihypertensive drug classes differ in their benefits and harms compared with each other as first-line therapy?    Electronic literature searches were performed by Doctor Evidence, a global medical evidence software and services company, across PubMed and EMBASE from 1966 to 2015 using key words and relevant subject headings for randomized controlled trials that met eligibility criteria defined for each question. We performed analyses using traditional frequentist statistical and Bayesian approaches, including random-effects Bayesian network meta-analyses.    Our results suggest that: 1) There is a modest but significant improvement in systolic BP in randomized controlled trials of self-measured BP versus usual care at 6 but not 12 months, and for selected patients and their providers self-measured BP may be a helpful adjunct to routine office care. 2) systolic BP lowering to a target of <130 mm Hg may reduce the risk of several important outcomes including risk of myocardial infarction, stroke, heart failure, and major cardiovascular events. No class of medications (i.e., angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, angiotensin-receptor blockers, calcium channel blockers, or beta blockers) was significantly better than thiazides and thiazide-like diuretics as a first-line therapy for any outcome.
Since the inception of the Canadian Cardiovascular Society heart failure (HF) guidelines in 2006, much has changed in the care for patients with HF. Over the past decade, the HF Guidelines Committee has published regular updates. However, because of the major changes that have occurred, the Guidelines Committee believes that a comprehensive reassessment of the HF management recommendations is presently needed, with a view to producing a full and complete set of updated guidelines. The primary and secondary Canadian Cardiovascular Society HF panel members as well as external experts have reviewed clinically relevant literature to provide guidance for the practicing clinician. The 2017 HF guidelines provide updated guidance on the diagnosis and management (self-care, pharmacologic, nonpharmacologic, device, and referral) that should aid in day-to-day decisions for caring for patients with HF. Among specific issues covered are risk scores, the differences in management for HF with preserved vs reduced ejection fraction, exercise and rehabilitation, implantable devices, revascularization, right ventricular dysfunction, anemia, and iron deficiency, cardiorenal syndrome, sleep apnea, cardiomyopathies, HF in pregnancy, cardio-oncology, and myocarditis. We devoted attention to strategies and treatments to prevent HF, to the organization of HF care, comorbidity management, as well as practical issues around the timing of referral and follow-up care. Recognition and treatment of advanced HF is another important aspect of this update, including how to select advanced therapies as well as end of life considerations. Finally, we acknowledge the remaining gaps in evidence that need to be filled by future research.
Orthotopic heart transplantation (OHT) is limited by a chronic shortage of donors. With the evolution of technology, more patients have been bridged to transplant (BTT) through various pathways using various types of mechanical circulatory support. We compared short- and long-term outcomes among these various strategies of BTT.    We retrospectively reviewed 410 patients who had OHT between January 2009 and April 2015. Patients were divided into 4 groups according to BTT status: primary OHT without bridging (Group A, n\u2009=\u2009246); bridge with implantable continuous-flow left ventricular assist device (CF-LVAD) (Group B, n\u2009=\u2009130); bridge with short-term mechanical circulatory support (Group C, n\u2009=\u200916) and bridge with multiple mechanical circulatory supports, including short-term mechanical circulatory support and CF-LVAD (Group D, n\u2009=\u200918). Early and late outcomes after OHT were compared among the groups.    The total duration of device support was 110.4 patient-years, 1.8 patient-years and 21.0 patient-years in Groups B, C and D, respectively. Patients who were bridged with CF-LVAD (Groups B and D) were more likely to have larger body size, blood type O, idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy and ischaemic cardiomyopathy as an aetiology, lower total bilirubin level and longer waiting time on the United Network for Organ Sharing Status 1A. There was no statistical difference between the 4 groups in serum panel reactive antigen levels before OHT. Hospital mortality was 4% in Group A, 8% in Group B, 13% in Group C and 6% in Group D (P\u2009=\u20090.307). Post-transplant survival at 3\u2009years was 80% in Group A, 82% in Group B, 75% in Group C and 88% in Group D (P\u2009=\u20090.752).    BTT strategies using various mechanical circulatory support devices can provide comparable clinical outcomes to primary OHT. Flexibility in the use of both short-term mechanical circulatory support and CF-LVAD is necessary depending on the patient's background.
Acute heart failure (HF) is a prevalent disease with important socio-economic repercussions. Due to the aging of population, these values will increase in the coming years, so it may be useful to the implementation of intervention programs in these patients to decrease morbidity and mortality. A quasi-experimental prospective study (n = 262) of patients admitted at the Internal Medicine Department of the Hospital Cl\xednico Universitario Lozano Blesa, in Zaragoza, Spain, diagnosed of HF between November 2013 and October 2014 (both dates inclusive) (n = 108) followed up for 1 year was performed. Within this group, a subgroup with an intensive intervention (n = 30) was performed. The data were compared with a historical cohort of patients admitted to the same department during the same time in the previous year (from November 2012 to October 2013) (n = 154). Statistically significant differences between groups attending to the therapeutical adherence to clinical guidelines (p < 0.011) were observed. Considering the intensive intervention subgroup, statistically significant differences were observed in the rate of exitus (p < 0.032) and survival (log rank <0.030) compared to the control group. The close monitoring of patients with HF improves adherence, reduces mortality and improves survival. This May result in a decline in the use of health resources, which entails significant socio-economic benefits.
Although large randomized clinical trials have found that primary prevention use of an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) improves survival in patients with cardiomyopathy and heart failure symptoms, patients who receive ICDs in practice are often older and have more comorbidities than patients who were enrolled in the clinical trials. In addition, there is a debate among clinicians on the usefulness of electrophysiological study for risk stratification of asymptomatic patients with Brugada syndrome.    Our analysis has 2 objectives. First, to evaluate whether ventricular arrhythmias (VAs) induced with programmed electrostimulation in asymptomatic patients with Brugada syndrome identify a higher risk group that may require additional testing or therapies. Second, to evaluate whether implantation of an ICD is associated with a clinical benefit in older patients and patients with comorbidities who would otherwise benefit on the basis of left ventricular ejection fraction and heart failure symptoms.    Traditional statistical approaches were used to address 1) whether programmed ventricular stimulation identifies a higher-risk group in asymptomatic patients with Brugada syndrome and 2) whether ICD implantation for primary prevention is associated with improved outcomes in older patients (>75 years of age) and patients with significant comorbidities who would otherwise meet criteria for ICD implantation on the basis of symptoms or left ventricular function RESULTS: Evidence from 6 studies of 1138 asymptomatic patients were identified. Brugada syndrome with inducible VA on electrophysiological study was identified in 390 (34.3%) patients. To minimize patient overlap, the primary analysis used 5 of the 6 studies and found an odds ratio of 2.3 (95% CI: 0.63-8.66; p=0.2) for major arrhythmic events (sustained VAs, sudden cardiac death, or appropriate ICD therapy) in asymptomatic patients with Brugada syndrome and inducible VA on electrophysiological study versus those without inducible VA. Ten studies were reviewed that evaluated ICD use in older patients and 4 studies that evaluated unique patient populations were identified. In our analysis, ICD implantation was associated with improved survival (overall hazard ratio: 0.75; 95% confidence interval: 0.67-0.83; p<0.001). Ten studies were identified that evaluated ICD use in patients with various comorbidities including renal disease, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, atrial fibrillation, heart disease, and others. A random effects model demonstrated that ICD use was associated with reduced all-cause mortality (overall hazard ratio: 0.72; 95% confidence interval: 0.65-0.79; p<0.0001), and a second "minimal overlap" analysis also found that ICD use was associated with reduced all-cause mortality (overall hazard ratio: 0.71; 95% confidence interval: 0.61-0.82; p<0.0001). In 5 studies that included data on renal dysfunction, ICD implantation was associated with reduced all-cause mortality (overall hazard ratio: 0.71; 95% confidence interval: 0.60-0.85; p<0.001).
Although large randomized clinical trials have found that primary prevention use of an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) improves survival in patients with cardiomyopathy and heart failure symptoms, patients who receive ICDs in practice are often older and have more comorbidities than patients who were enrolled in the clinical trials. In addition, there is a debate among clinicians on the usefulness of electrophysiological study for risk stratification of asymptomatic patients with Brugada syndrome.    Our analysis has 2 objectives. First, to evaluate whether ventricular arrhythmias (VAs) induced with programmed electrostimulation in asymptomatic patients with Brugada syndrome identify a higher risk group that may require additional testing or therapies. Second, to evaluate whether implantation of an ICD is associated with a clinical benefit in older patients and patients with comorbidities who would otherwise benefit on the basis of left ventricular ejection fraction and heart failure symptoms.    Traditional statistical approaches were used to address 1) whether programmed ventricular stimulation identifies a higher-risk group in asymptomatic patients with Brugada syndrome and 2) whether ICD implantation for primary prevention is associated with improved outcomes in older patients (>75 years of age) and patients with significant comorbidities who would otherwise meet criteria for ICD implantation on the basis of symptoms or left ventricular function RESULTS: Evidence from 6 studies of 1138 asymptomatic patients were identified. Brugada syndrome with inducible VA on electrophysiological study was identified in 390 (34.3%) patients. To minimize patient overlap, the primary analysis used 5 of the 6 studies and found an odds ratio of 2.3 (95% CI: 0.63-8.66; p=0.2) for major arrhythmic events (sustained VAs, sudden cardiac death, or appropriate ICD therapy) in asymptomatic patients with Brugada syndrome and inducible VA on electrophysiological study versus those without inducible VA. Ten studies were reviewed that evaluated ICD use in older patients and 4 studies that evaluated unique patient populations were identified. In our analysis, ICD implantation was associated with improved survival (overall hazard ratio: 0.75; 95% confidence interval: 0.67-0.83; p<0.001). Ten studies were identified that evaluated ICD use in patients with various comorbidities including renal disease, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, atrial fibrillation, heart disease, and others. A random effects model demonstrated that ICD use was associated with reduced all-cause mortality (overall hazard ratio: 0.72; 95% confidence interval: 0.65-0.79; p<0.0001), and a second "minimal overlap" analysis also found that ICD use was associated with reduced all-cause mortality (overall hazard ratio: 0.71; 95% confidence interval: 0.61-0.82; p<0.0001). In 5 studies that included data on renal dysfunction, ICD implantation was associated with reduced all-cause mortality (overall hazard ratio: 0.71; 95% confidence interval: 0.60-0.85; p<0.001).
Despite the improvements in the management of hypertension during the last three decades, it continues to be one of the leading causes of cardiovascular morbidity and mortality worldwide. Effective and sustained reductions in blood pressure (BP) reduce the incidence of myocardial infarction, stroke, congestive heart failure and cardiovascular death. However, the proportion of patients who achieve the recommended BP goal (< 140/90 mmHg) is persistently low, worldwide. Poor adherence to therapy, complex therapeutic regimens, clinical inertia, drug-related adverse events and multiple risk factors or comorbidities contribute to the disparity between the potential and actual BP control rate. Previously we published a practical therapeutic platform for the treatment of hypertension based on clinical evidence, guidelines, best practice and clinical experience. This platform provides a personalised treatment approach and can be used to improve BP control and simplify treatment. It uses long-acting, effective and well-tolerated angiotensin receptor blocker (ARB) olmesartan, in combination with a calcium channel blocker amlodipine, and/or a thiazide diuretic hydrochlorothiazide. These drugs were selected based on the availability in most European Countries of single-pill, fixed formulations in a wide range of doses for both dual- and triple-drug combinations. The platform approach could be applied to other ARBs or angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors available in single-pill, fixed-dose combinations. Here, we present an update, which takes into account the results of the recently published studies and extends the applicability of the platform to common conditions that are often neglected or poorly considered in clinical practice guidelines.
Clinical management of comorbidities is a challenge, especially in a clinical decision support setting, as it requires the safe and efficient reconciliation of multiple disease-specific clinical procedures to formulate a comorbid therapeutic plan that is both effective and safe for the patient. In this paper we pursue the integration of multiple disease-specific Clinical Practice Guidelines (CPG) in order to manage co-morbidities within a computerized Clinical Decision Support System (CDSS). We present a CPG integration framework-termed as COMET (Comorbidity Ontological Modeling & ExecuTion) that manifests a knowledge management approach to model, computerize and integrate multiple CPG to yield a comorbid CPG knowledge model that upon execution can provide evidence-based recommendations for handling comorbid patients. COMET exploits semantic web technologies to achieve (a) CPG knowledge synthesis to translate a paper-based CPG to disease-specific clinical pathways (CP) that include specialized co-morbidity management procedures based on input from domain experts; (b) CPG knowledge modeling to computerize the disease-specific CP using a Comorbidity CPG ontology; (c) CPG knowledge integration by aligning multiple ontologically-modeled CP to develop a unified comorbid CPG knowledge model; and (e) CPG knowledge execution using reasoning engines to derive CPG-mediated recommendations for managing patients with comorbidities. We present a web-accessible COMET CDSS that provides family physicians with CPG-mediated comorbidity decision support to manage Atrial Fibrillation and Chronic Heart Failure. We present our qualitative and quantitative analysis of the knowledge content and usability of COMET CDSS.
In the past years, cardiovascular mortality has decreased but despite these cardiovascular diseases are responsible for millions of deaths every year in the world and approximately 25% of which are sudden cardiac death (SCD). Implantable defibrillators (ICD) is proven therapy used in primary and secondary SCD prevention. Currently majority of devices use transvenous leads inserted predominantly into the right heart for both pacing and defibrillation. On the other hand, ICD may cause complica-tions, including inappropriate shocks, device-related infection and lead failure. Problems with transvenous leads prompted the development of a subcutaneous defibrillator (S-ICD) with an electrode system that is placed entirely subcutaneously, outside the thoracic cavity. The device may be useful when venous access is difficult, in young patients and in patients at particular risk of infection. S-ICD is not suitable for patients with indications for bradycardia pacing, cardiac resynchronisation therapy and in cases with tachyarrhythmia easily terminated by antitachycardia pacing.
Oxygenator failure during cardiopulmonary bypass constitutes a life-threatening event, especially when perfusion is conducted under normothermia. An alternative solution to emergency oxygenator changeover is described.    A supplementary oxygenator is added in the venous line without interrupting perfusion. De-airing is achieved through the cardiotomy reservoir. Oxygen supply is adapted to ensure physiologic partial oxygen pressure.    On 5 occasions in the past 4\u2009years, Capiox Baby FX 05 oxygenator (n\u2009=\u20094) and Capiox FX15 (n\u2009=\u20091) failed to exchange blood gases after bypass run ranging from 290\u2009min to 563\u2009min. Hypoxia ensued with partial oxygen pressure values of 49-79\u2009mmHg with a fraction of inspired oxygen of 1. An additional veno-venous Terumo Capiox FX 05 oxygenator immediately improved oxygenation with resulting partial oxygen pressure increasing to at least 291\u2009mmHg.    An additional veno-venous oxygenator effectively corrects failing oxygenator during cardiopulmonary bypass. The method does not require circulation arrest. It does not carry the risk of air embolism. It can be carried out without any help from a second perfusionist or member of operation team.
With an estimated prevalence of 5.8 million in the USA and over 23 million people worldwide, heart failure (HF) is growing in epidemic proportions. Despite the use of guideline-directed medical therapies such as angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, beta-adrenergic blockers, angiotensin receptor blockers, and mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists for chronic systolic HF for almost two decades, HF remains a leading cause of morbidity, mortality, and health care expenditures. The Prospective Comparison of Angiotensin Receptor-Neprilysin Inhibitor with Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme Inhibitor to Determine Impact on Global Mortality and Morbidity in Heart Failure (PARADIGM-HF) trial provided compelling evidence for the cardiovascular and mortality benefit of sacubitril/valsartan when compared to enalapril in patients with heart failure and reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF). Sacubitril/valsartan performed better than enalapril across various HFrEF patient characteristics and showed substantial benefit in patients with other common comorbidities. Following the trial, the US Food and Drug Administration approved this drug for the treatment of HF. Various international HF consensus guidelines endorse sacubitril/valsartan as a class I recommendation for the management of symptomatic HFrEF. Although this high-quality clinical study is the largest and the most globally represented trial in HFrEF patients, concerns have been raised regarding the generalizability of the trial results in real-world HF population. The gaps in US Food and Drug Administration labeling and guideline recommendations might lead to this medication being used in a larger population than it was studied in. In this review, we will discuss the current role of sacubitril/valsartan in the management of HF, concerns related to PARADIGM-HF and answers, shortcomings of this novel drug, effects on patient characteristics, real-world eligibility, and the role of ongoing and further investigations to clarify the profile of sacubitril/valsartan in the management of HF.
To determine the optimum chest compression site during cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) with regard to heart failure (HF) by applying three-dimensional (3D) coordinates on computed tomography (CT).    This retrospective, cross-sectional study involved adults who underwent echocardiography and CT on the same day from 2007 to 2017. Incomplete CT images or information on HF, cardiac medication between echocardiography and CT, or thoracic abnormalities were excluded. Cases were checked whether they had HF through symptom/sign assessment, N-terminal pro-B type natriuretic peptide, and echocardiography. We set the xiphisternal joint's midpoint as the reference (0, 0, 0) to draw a 3D coordinate system, designating leftward, upward, and into-the-thorax directions as positive. The coordinate of the maximum LV diameter's midpoint (P_max.LV) was identified.    Enrolled were 148 patients (63.0\xb115.1 years) with 87 females and 76 HF cases. P_max.LV of HF cases was located more leftwards, lower, and deeper than non-HF cases (5.69\xb10.98, -1.51\xb11.67, 5.76\xb11.09 cm vs. 5.00\xb10.83, -0.99\xb11.36, 5.25\xb10.71 cm, all p<0.05). Fewer HF cases had their LV compressed than non-HF cases (59.2% vs. 77.8%, p=0.025) when being compressed according to the current guidelines. The aorta (vs. LV) was compressed in 85.5% and 81.9% of HF and non-HF cases, respectively, at 3 cm above the xiphisternal joint. At 6cm above the joint, the highest allowable position according to the current guidelines, all victims would have their aorta compressed directly during CPR rather than the LV.    The lowest possible sternum just above the xiphisternal joint should be compressed especially for HF patients during CPR.
Globally, there are 18-million individuals living with heart failure, a disease that is responsible for 12-15 million office visits and 6.5 million inpatient hospitalizations each year. As HF becomes advanced or end-stage, patients often live in a cycle of frequent transitions between care settings, and with unmet needs, including distress from inadequately managed symptoms. Prognostication in patients with heart failure can be challenging due to the unpredictable exacerbating-remitting illness trajectory that is associated with this progressive disease. Recurrent hospitalizations, worsening functional status and refractory symptoms, despite optimal therapies, are among the most salient predictors indicating that patients with advanced heart failure are nearing the end of life. Palliative care is a specialized form of medical care that has been shown to help improve severity of symptoms, facilitate discussions regarding medical decision making/advance care planning, and provide support for patients and their families. Palliative care can be used alongside curative treatments and has been shown to improve patient satisfaction and quality of life. Anorexia-cachexia syndrome, dyspnea, fatigue, pain and depression are among the most common symptoms experienced by patients suffering from advanced heart failure. Palliative care can help alleviate these symptoms and also facilitate conversations about decision making surrounding resuscitation status and use or deactivation of medical devices, such as an implantable-cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD). Clinical practice guidelines from the American College of Cardiology and American Heart Association report that aggressive life-sustaining treatments and therapies should not be utilized in patients with advanced heart failure who have refractory symptoms that are not responding to medical therapy. The focus of care should switch to controlling symptoms, reducing hospital admissions and improving health-related quality of life, which can be supported by the incorporation of palliative care into the treatment plan.
Standards for bereavement care propose that support should be matched to risk and need. However, studies in many countries demonstrate that palliative care services continue to adopt a generic approach in offering support to bereaved families.    To identify patterns of bereavement support in palliative care services based upon the experience of bereaved people from a population based survey and in relation to clinical practice guidelines.    An anonymous postal survey collected information from clients of six funeral providers in four Australian states (2014-15), 6 to 24 months after the death of their family member or friend, with 1,139 responding. Responses from 506 bereaved relatives of people who had terminal illnesses were analysed. Of these, 298 had used palliative care services and 208 had not.    More people with cancer (64%) had received palliative care in comparison to other illnesses such as heart disease, dementia and organ failure (4-10%). The support for family caregivers before and after their relative's death was not considered optimal. Only 39.4% of the bereaved reported being specifically asked about their emotional/ psychological distress pre-bereavement, and just half of the bereaved perceived they had enough support from palliative care services. Half of the bereaved had a follow up contact from the service at 3-6 weeks, and a quarter had a follow-up at 6 months. Their qualitative feedback underlined the limited helpfulness of the blanket approach to bereavement support, which was often described as "not personal" or "generic", or "just standard practice".    Timeliness and consistency of relationship is crucial to building rapport and trust in the service's ability to help at post-bereavement as well as a focus on the specific rather than the generic needs of the bereaved. In light of these limitations, palliative care services might do better investing their efforts principally in assessing and supporting family caregivers during the pre-bereavement period and developing community capacity and referral pathways for bereavement care. Our findings suggest that bereavement support in Australian palliative care services has only a tenuous relationship with guidelines and assessment tools, a conclusion also drawn in studies from other countries, emphasizing the international implications of our study.
To identify managerial and organizational characteristics of multi-specialty medicine wards and individual characteristics of health professionals that are most strongly associated with clinical practice guidelines (CPG) adherence.    Cross-sectional stratified cluster sample design.    Data were gathered from 36 randomly selected multi-specialty medicine wards.    The study population included all health professionals involved in patient care working in the participating wards.    The degree of CPG adherence was measured using clinical vignettes on three topics: pain management, managing heart failure and managing diabetes. Responses from each professional to each clinical case were quantified using a 10-point scale. Managerial and organizational characteristics of medical department and individual characteristics of health professionals were obtained using three questionnaires.    The study sample consisted of 859 professionals (362 orderlies, 361 nurses and 136 physicians). Factors independently and positively associated with CPG adherence were (i) individual factors: low age of professionals, expertise in diabetology and activity in cardiology; (ii) organizational and managerial factors: good understanding between physicians and other personnel; and (iii) structural factors: computer-based test results and prescriptions, presence of medical specialists, inter-department mobility of orderlies, medium-length stay (between 7 and 10 days) and large bed capacity.    Good CPG adherence in general medicine needs institutional dynamism, availability of clinical competence and team culture based on cooperation.
Pleural effusions occur in 1.5 million patients yearly and are a common cause of dyspnea. For nonmalignant effusions, initial treatment is directed at the underlying cause, but when effusions become refractory to medical therapy, palliative options are limited. Tunneled pleural catheters (TPCs) are commonly used for palliation of malignant effusions, but many clinicians are reluctant to recommend these devices for palliation of nonmalignant effusions, citing concerns of infection, renal failure, electrolyte disturbances and protein-loss malnutrition. Based on the published experience to date, TPCs relieve dyspnea and can result in spontaneous pleurodesis in patients with nonmalignant effusions. The infection rate compares favorably to that for malignant effusions with possible increased risk in patients with hepatic hydrothorax and posttransplant patients. Renal failure, electrolyte disturbance and protein-loss malnutrition have not been observed. TPCs are a reasonable option in select patients to palliate nonmalignant effusions refractory to maximal medical therapy.
The benefit or harm of a single medication recommended for one specific condition can be difficult to determine in individuals with multiple chronic conditions and polypharmacy. There is limited information on the associations between guideline-recommended medications and physical function in older adults with multiple chronic conditions. The objective of this study was to estimate the beneficial or harmful associations between guideline-recommended medications and decline in physical function in older adults with multiple chronic conditions.    Prospective observational cohort.    National.    Community-dwelling adults aged 65 and older from the Medicare Current Beneficiary Survey study (N = 3,273). Participants with atrial fibrillation, coronary artery disease, depression, diabetes mellitus, or heart failure were included.    Self-reported decline in physical function; guideline-recommended medications; polypharmacy (taking <7 vs \u22657 concomitant medications); chronic conditions; and sociodemographic, behavioral, and health risk factors.    The risk of decline in function in the overall sample was highest in participants with heart failure (35.4%, 95% confidence interval (CI) = 26.3-44.5) and lowest for those with atrial fibrillation (20.6%, 95% CI = 14.9-26.2). In the overall sample, none of the six guideline-recommended medications was associated with decline in physical function across the five study conditions, although in the group with low polypharmacy exposure, there was lower risk of decline in those with heart failure taking renin angiotensin system blockers (hazard ratio (HR) = 0.40, 95% CI = 0.16-0.99) and greater risk of decline in physical function for participants with diabetes mellitus taking statins (HR = 2.27, 95% CI = 1.39-3.69).    In older adults with multiple chronic conditions, guideline-recommended medications for atrial fibrillation, coronary artery disease, depression, diabetes mellitus, and heart failure were largely not associated with self-reported decline in physical function, although there were associations for some medications in those with less polypharmacy.
Treatment of acute emergencies in patients with pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) can be challenging. In the UK and Ireland, management of adult patients with PAH is centred in eight nationally designated pulmonary hypertension (PH) centres. However, many patients live far from these centres and physicians in local hospitals are often required to manage PAH emergencies. A committee of physicians from nationally designated PH centres identified the 'most common' emergency clinical scenarios encountered in patients with PAH. Thereafter, a review of the literature was performed centred on these specified topics and a management approach was developed based on best available evidence and expert consensus. Management protocols were developed on the following PAH emergencies: chest pain (including myocardial ischaemia), right ventricular failure, arrhythmias, sepsis, haemoptysis ('CRASH'), as well as considerations relevant to surgery, anaesthesia and pregnancy. Emergencies are not uncommon in PAH. While expertise in PAH management is essential, all physicians involved in acute care should be aware of the principles of acute management of PAH emergencies. A multidisciplinary approach is necessary, with physicians from tertiary PH centres supporting care locally and planning safe transfer of patients to PH centres when appropriate.
Heart failure is raising an increasing interest in patients with type 2 diabetes. Indeed, they combine different risk factors for this complication and they have time to develop it because they survive longer due to a better prevention of atherothrombotic cardiovascular events. Beyond the classical therapy of heart failure, management should select the most suited glucose-lowering agents. Indeed, all do not have the same impact as some of them have proven their ability to reduce the risk of hospitalisation for heart failure whereas others are associated with an increased risk, either well proven or at least suspected. The aim of this clinical case is to discuss the use of glucose-lowering drugs in a patient with type 2 diabetes with or at risk to develop heart failure.
Despite the great progress made in the management of heart failure (HF) with reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF), its prevalence continues to rise owing to an aging population and an epidemic of hypertension, obesity and coronary artery disease. For decades, angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors and beta blockers have been the mainstay of HFrEF therapy. The recent addition of sacubitril/valsartan and ivabradine to the HF armamentarium has the potential to transform our therapeutic approach to HFrEF, while simultaneously raising some questions and uncertainties on their applicability. In this paper, we review the pathophysiology of HFrEF, discuss already established and novel evidenced-based pharmacologic therapies available for these patients. We also share some therapeutic strategies aimed to optimize HF therapy in specific undertreated patient populations including the elderly and patients with chronic kidney disease, while offering insight on how to tailor therapy in the "real-world."
For many neuromuscular diseases (NMDs), cardiac disease represents a major cause of morbidity and mortality. The management of cardiac disease in NMDs is made challenging by the broad clinical heterogeneity that exists among many NMDs and by limited knowledge about disease-specific cardiovascular pathogenesis and course-modifying interventions. The overlay of compromise in peripheral muscle function and other organ systems, such as the lungs, also makes the simple application of endorsed adult or pediatric heart failure guidelines to the NMD population problematic. In this statement, we provide background on several NMDs in which there is cardiac involvement, highlighting unique features of NMD-associated myocardial disease that require clinicians to tailor their approach to prevention and treatment of heart failure. Undoubtedly, further investigations are required to best inform future guidelines on NMD-specific cardiovascular health risks, treatments, and outcomes.
The immense symptom burden and healthcare expenditure associated with heart failure (HF) has resulted in hospital systems, insurance companies, and federal agencies playing close attention to systems of care delivery. In particular, there has been a large extent of focus on decreasing the frequency of HF readmissions through the development of hospital quality measures and the expansion of post discharge services to improve transitions of care from the inpatient to the outpatient setting. The post discharge clinic visit (PDV) serves an important role in this process as it acts as a fulcrum for the multi-disciplinary services available to HF patients, as well as an opportunity to fill any gaps that might have occurred in evidence based care of the patient. The objective of this review is to provide a blueprint for the PDV that will allow clinicians to construct the key elements of the PDV in a patient-centered fashion that is firmly rooted in the guidelines.
Background Digoxin is a cardiac glycoside that is recommended by clinical practice guidelines to be used in patients with heart failure with reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF) who still have persistent symptoms despite optimal medical therapy. However, this recommendation is based on limited and old trial data. Moreover, pharmacoepidemiologic studies are important in determining the prevalence of digoxin use and factors influencing this. Objective This study aimed to determine the prevalence and the predictors of digoxin utilization among patients with HFrEF with or without atrial fibrillation (AF) in Qatar. Setting Heart Hospital, a specialized tertiary care center in Qatar. Methods A retrospective observational study was conducted using Cerner electronic medical records. Subjects included 736 patients admitted between January 1, 2013 and December 31, 2014 with the diagnosis of HFrEF with or without AF. Two groups of patients were studied: digoxin users and digoxin non-users at index hospitalization until discharge. Univariate and multivariate binary logistic regression analyses were conducted to determine the predictors of digoxin prescription. Data analyses were performed using IBM SPSS
Clinical practice guidelines recommend referral to nephrology when estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) decreases to <30mL/min/1.73m    Observational cohort using landmark analysis.    A national cohort of veterans with advanced chronic kidney disease, defined as an outpatient eGFR\u226430mL/min/1.73m    Receipt and frequency of outpatient nephrology care over 12 months.    Survival and progression to end-stage renal disease (ESRD; receipt of dialysis or kidney transplantation) were the primary outcomes. In addition, control of associated clinical parameters over 12 months were intermediate outcomes.    Of 39,669 patients included in the cohort, 14,983 (37.8%) received nephrology care. Older age, heart failure, dementia, depression, and rapidly declining kidney function were independently associated with the absence of nephrology care. During a mean follow-up of 2.9 years, 14,719 (37.1%) patients died and 4,310 (10.9%) progressed to ESRD. In models adjusting for demographics, comorbid conditions, and trajectory of kidney function, nephrology care was associated with lower risk for death (HR, 0.88; 95% CI, 0.85-0.91), but higher risk for ESRD (HR, 1.48; 95% CI, 1.38-1.58). Among patients with clinical parameters outside guideline recommendations at cohort entry, a significantly higher adjusted proportion of patients who received nephrology care had improvement in control of hemoglobin, potassium, albumin, calcium, and phosphorus concentrations compared with those who did not receive nephrology care.    May not be generalizable to nonveterans.    Among patients with advanced chronic kidney disease, nephrology care was associated with lower mortality, but was not associated with lower risk for progression to ESRD.
Hyperkalemia is a potentially life-threatening electrolyte disorder appreciated with greater frequency in patients with renal disease, heart failure, and with use of certain medications such as renin angiotensin aldosterone inhibitors. The traditional views that hyperkalemia can be reliably diagnosed by electrocardiogram and that particular levels of hyperkalemia confer cardiotoxic risk have been challenged by several reports of patients with atypic presentations. Epidemiologic data demonstrate strong associations of morbidity and mortality in patients with hyperkalemia but these associations appear disconnected in certain patient populations and in differing clinical presentations. Physiologic adaptation, structural cardiac disease, medication use, and degree of concurrent illness might predispose certain patients presenting with hyperkalemia to a lower or higher threshold for toxicity. These factors are often overlooked; yet data suggest that the clinical context in which hyperkalemia develops is at least as important as the degree of hyperkalemia is in determining patient outcome. This review summarizes the clinical data linking hyperkalemia with poor outcomes and discusses how the efficacy of certain treatments might depend on the clinical presentation.
We present in this article the review of 6 scientific Hot Line sessions of the 2016 European Congress of Cardiology devoted to novel approaches to treatment of heart failure, strategies of prevention of complications of cardiovascular diseases, dyslipidemia, imaging methods of investigation, and stenting in coronary heart disease.
Despite the known cardiotoxic effects of doxorubicin and other anthracyclines, no evidence-based guidelines exist for the surveillance and prevention of chemotherapy-induced cardiotoxicity in adult survivors of breast cancer who have had limited previous doses of anthracyclines (ie, total cumulative dose 240 mg/m
Heart failure is the main chronic disease in cardiology. Its prognosis remains poor despite improvements in its management that allow patients to live increasingly longer with this disease, alternating periods of stability and episodes of decompensation. Treatment guidelines are regularly updated to integrate new results of recent trials that are likely to influence routine care. These guidelines are proposed with different classes of recommendations and difference levels of evidence. It is of paramount importance to summarize the guidelines to make them accessible to the vast majority of cardiologists and easier to read to promote their application. Among the main novelties of the last set of European guidelines for the management of heart failure, we note the proposal for a new classification based on the level of left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) with a new class, called heart failure with mid-range ejection fraction (LVEF 40-50 %), new algorithms for diagnosis and treatment, including the diagnosis of heart failure with preserved ejection fraction, a special focus on preventive strategies, the management of comorbidities including iron deficiency, simplification of the indications for cardiac resynchronization therapy, and finally a growing attention to patient pathways and to the management of hospital discharge. According to these guidelines, it is important that the physician choose the appropriate medications; but it is equally fundamental that the patient understands the disease and acquires self-care skills needed to become a real player in its management. This requires patient education, which is underdeveloped in France.
The GERS (Exercise Rehabilitation and Sports Group of the French Society of Cardiology) has decided to update current guidelines regarding the practice of EKG stress tests. Since the last update dates from 1997, the GERS judged it necessary to integrate data from new works and advancements made in the last 20 years. Good clinical practices and safety conditions are better defined regarding the structure, location, material, staff competency, as well as convention with hospital structures. The diagnosis of coronary artery disease remains the principal indication for a stress test. Interpretation of the results is crucial-it must be multivariate and provide either a low, intermediate or strong probability of the existence of coronary lesions, taking into account the studied population (risk factors, age, sex and symptoms). Several new indications for a stress test have been defined for the assessment of cardiac pathologies. With such indications, the use of gas expiration measurements is highly recommended in order to provide a precise prognosis for all the various cardiac pathologies : congenital, ischemic, valvular, cardiomyopathies, congestive heart failure, rhythm and conduction disorders, pacemaker fine-tuning, or pulmonary hypertension. Indications for stress tests and contraindications are defined according to different population subgroups, for instance : athletes, women, children, the elderly, asymptomatic patients, diabetics, hypertensive patients, PAD patients, or in the context of a non-cardiac surgery pre-op visit. The new guidelines (due for publication soon) are considerably different from those dating from 1997 and further pinpoint the relevance and importance of an EKG stress test within the arsenal of complementary cardiologic exams. With the improvements made in providing diagnostic value in CAD, as well as better prognostic value for any underlying pathology, the indication for an EKG stress test has extended to all cardiovascular disease.
Long-term aspirin prevents vascular events but is only modestly effective. Rivaroxaban alone or in combination with aspirin might be more effective than aspirin alone for vascular prevention in patients with stable coronary artery disease (CAD) or peripheral artery disease (PAD). Rivaroxaban as well as aspirin increase upper gastrointestinal (GI) bleeding and this might be prevented by proton pump inhibitor therapy.    Cardiovascular Outcomes for People Using Anticoagulation Strategies (COMPASS) is a double-blind superiority trial comparing rivaroxaban 2.5 mg twice daily combined with aspirin 100 mg once daily or rivaroxaban 5 mg twice daily vs aspirin 100 mg once daily for prevention of myocardial infarction, stroke, or cardiovascular death in patients with stable CAD or PAD. Patients not taking a proton pump inhibitor were also randomized, using a partial factorial design, to pantoprazole 40 mg once daily or placebo. The trial was designed to have at least 90% power to detect a 20% reduction in each of the rivaroxaban treatment arms compared with aspirin and to detect a 50% reduction in upper GI complications with pantoprazole compared with placebo.    Between February 2013 and May 2016, we recruited 27,395 participants from 602 centres in 33 countries; 17,598 participants were included in the pantoprazole vs placebo comparison. At baseline, the mean age was 68.2 years, 22.0% were female, 90.6% had CAD, and 27.3% had PAD.    COMPASS will provide information on the efficacy and safety of rivaroxaban, alone or in combination with aspirin, in the long-term management of patients with stable CAD or PAD, and on the efficacy and safety of pantoprazole in preventing upper GI complications in patients receiving antithrombotic therapy.
